A learning journey on understanding financial figures
reported by companies, should always start with a thorough
understanding of the balance sheet. This lecture
will illustrate the big building blocks of such a
document.
The balance sheet is one of the key documents in a
company's annual report, and basically consists of
two sides. The left hand side provides an overview
of the company's property and belongings, generally
referred to as assets. The right hand side
presents all the resources that have been used to
finance these assets. As a consequence the total
amounts at both sides, should always be equal. The
balance sheet needs to be made at least once a year,
typically at the end of the calendar year. Although
companies are free to opt for an alternative
closing date of the accounts.
Let's now zoom in on the left hand side of the balance
sheet. The first distinction is made based upon
how long the assets are expected to be deployed at
the company. Fixed assets or, non-current assets
typically stay longer than one year in the
organisation. While current assets are expected to
remain less than a year.
We further distinguish between two types of fixed
assets. Tangible assets are all fixed assets, with
a physical appearance, such as land, buildings,
machines, equipment, cars, and trucks. These are
often referred to as property, plans and equipment
or P P E.
Intangible assets do not have a physical shape, but
can be of great importance to the company.
Examples include intellectual property, patents
and licences.
Three types of current assets can be identified.
First, inventory, captures raw materials or
finished products that are not yet sold.
Second, accounts receivable, reflects the amount of
money that still needs to be paid, by clients for
goods or services that have already been delivered.
Finally, cash and short term money investments are the
most liquid assets in a company.
At the right hand side we make a primary
distinction between equity and liabilities. Equity
reflects financing provided by shareholders. It
consists of capital that is brought in directly by
shareholders, as well as the proportion of profits
that is not yet paid out as dividends,
labelled as retained earnings or reserves.
Liabilities or debt represent borrowed amounts,
and hence need to be repaid at one moment in time.
Again a distinction is made between short term, so
current, and long term, so non-current liabilities.
In addition we distinguish between financial and
operating liabilities, financial debt involves
interest bearing debt, stemming from banks or
bondholders. Bondholders are investors that lend
money directly to companies via the capital markets.
Operating liabilities on the other hand, relate to
the company's operations such as payments due to
suppliers, employees or the government.
I hope you all agree that the balance sheet is a
relatively easy document to read, that already gives
us some very relevant insights in, at the one hand,
what type of assets are companies investing in, and,
at the other hand, how it succeeded in financing
these assets.